
findandconnect.gov.au
Leprosy - Summary | Find & Connect

Some people may find content on this website distressing. Read more

Northern Territory - Glossary Term

Alternative Names

        Hanson's Disease

Leprosy, also known as Hanson's Disease, is a slow-developing bacterial infection that affects the skin, peripheral nerve endings in the hands and feet, and the mucus membranes of the nose, throat and eyes. The destruction of nerve endings causes loss of sensation which can lead to damage and mutilation of extremities. It was incorrectly believed to be highly contagious and incurable. Historically, around the world, people suffering from the disease were called 'lepers' and were shunned, segregated and often isolated in 'leper colonies'.
Read more
More Information [close]
Better understanding of the disease and its nature saw a gradual change in attitude to those suffering from leprosy during the second half of the twentieth century. Early detection of the disease and the development of anti-bacterial drugs led to a cure. In severe cases reconstructive surgery helped to repair the physical damage caused by the disease. Since the 1980s Leprosy in Australia has been treated in hospitals in the same way as other diseases.Leprosy was first detected in Northern Australia in the 1800s amongst the Chinese population who had come to the colony to work. It was first reported in the Northern Territory Aboriginal population in 1884.Leper stations - also known as Lazarettes, Leprosariums or Leper Hospitals - operated in many states of Australia. In the Northern Territory the first leprosarium was situated on Mud Island from 1889 until 1931. It was then moved to the former quarantine station on Channel Island (1931-1955) and finally to a new purpose built facility at East Arm (1955-1982) on the mainland.Other leprosaria in Australia include Stradbroke Island, Fantome Island and Peel Island in Queensland; Point Nepean and Coode Island in Victoria; Cossack and Derby Leprosariums in Western Australia and Little Bay Lazarette in NSW.
